RFC: Proposal for new signing mechanism (#37)
rubygems/rfcs: text/0000-introduce-a-new-signing-mechanism.md

1. **Opt-out install-time verification of gem signatures with strict policy.** At this phase signature verification is automated and gem signatures are the norm. We change verification policy to require signatures, treating the lack of a signature as an error. Users would be able to suppress this behavior on a gem-by-gem basis. This would provide further incentive for gem maintainers to sign their gems, and it would mean that the absence of a signature is a meaningful security signal. The server would warn older clients that unsigned gems will be subject to strict policy.

> In Phase 1, signing will be opt-in, meaning that signatures will require `build --sign` and verification will require `build install --verify-signatures` (or equivalent `gem signatures` commands). But by Phase 3, signing has become default in `build` and verifying is default in `install`. This guide explanation will assume that we have reached Phase 3, as this is the most complete scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Phase 1, signing will be opt-in, meaning that signatures will require `build --sign` and verification will require `gem install --verify-signatures` (or equivalent `gem signatures` commands). But by Phase 3, signing has become default in `build` and verifying is default in `install`. This guide explanation will assume that we have reached Phase 3, as this is the most complete scenario.
```

```

You may then perform signing separately, as described in the section [_Signing a gem after build time_](#signing-a-gem-after-build-time). This functionality is intended for maintainers of multiple related gems, who may wish to build a number of gems and then sign them in a single operation.

You should _always_ sign your gems, whether at build time or afterwards. Unsigned gems cannot be verified by signature, presenting a higher security risk to end users. For this reason, unsigned gems are treated as an error at installation by default.

#### Signature authentication flow

As part of the `gem build` command, the gem client will open the sigstore login page using your system web browser. To sign a gem, you must choose one of the identity providers that sigstore supports.

<img width="60%" alt="sigstore sign-in" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/33674553/151442880-563d3eaf-e965-4d98-88c9-b8c0dc1cbaed.png">
If you are not already signed in with your selected provider, you will need to log in.

<img width="60%" alt="Sign in to GitHub" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/33674553/151442855-bc68dbcd-757d-40be-b38b-88d2be61e386.png">

> You then need to grant sigstore permission to request your email address from your provider account. This step only occurs on your first attempt to sign a gem using this provider. Only provider-verified email addresses may be used to sign gems.

Reviewer 2: Just to confirm my reading here: the OIDC provider verified email here is **not** being checked against one (or more) valid emails for the RubyGems user identity?

In other words: is there any formal relationship between the signing email (on sigstore's side) and the email(s) registered to a RubyGems account?

Reviewer 3: > In other words: is there any formal relationship between the signing email (on sigstore's side) and the email(s) registered to a RubyGems account?

In this design, no. We key instead on the `email` field in the gemspec, since that file is controlled at build time. Unfortunately there's no fixed relationship between `email` and the set of rubygems.org owners of a gem.

Where we think the connection back to owners will be possible is if we add push events to the transparency log. Put another way: authors would publish signature log entries, but rubygems.org would publish the push event log entries. In the latter case rubygems.org can annotate which owner made the push.

Reviewer 3: Adding to the above, there's a security advantage in _not_ tying signatures to the owner emails as verified by rubygems.org. It creates a separate account, so that attackers need to achieve _two_ account takeovers to publish a signed but malicious gem. One for a rubygems account, one for an identity provider account.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification! That makes sense.

Reviewer 4: > Adding to the above, there's a security advantage in _not_ tying signatures to the owner emails as verified by rubygems.org. It means that attackers need to achieve _two_ account takeovers to publish a signed but malicious gem. One for a rubygems account, one for an identity provider account.

@jchestershopify I did not understand this point. I don't use gems so my understanding might be limited. Request you to please clarify. 
Let us assume that an attacker has taken over the account of a gem owner. Now, is it not possible for the attacker to do the following:
1. Modify the gemspec file to add a new `email` (or replace existing `email`) which is the attacker's email address
2. Sign using the newly added attacker `email` in the gemspec
3. Push the gem to rubygems.org using the owner's compromised account

Now, during `gem install`, the signature verification should work fine, since the gem is signed using an `email` associated with the gemspec.

Reviewer 5: `email` in `gemspec` is in there just for informational purpose. It doesn't grant access for publishing of gem. Adding another user to be able to push the gem is done via `gem owner` command (https://guides.rubygems.org/command-reference/#gem-owner).

Reviewer 6: > Adding to the above, there's a security advantage in not tying signatures to the owner emails

I don't believe so. If you have gem push rights, you can push a gemspec with any email addresses you want in it, of course. 

I think better integration between `gem owner` and the signature source of identity might actually be important for gem maintainer ergonomics and increasing ease of use and uptake here. As it is, a collaboratively-team-maintained gem will now have two pieces of metadata it needs to keep in sync, the gemspec email addreses (which were *previously* for informational purposes only, but now are important for verifying signed trust), as well as the `gem owner` system (in which rubygems has been gradually making it *harder* to find email addressees associated with gem ownership... which seems at cross-purposes here, where the proposal will put individual email addresess front and center again). 

Even if some changes to rubygems might have to be considered to allow leaning harder and/or integrating `gem owner` identity here, I think it might be worth it, for ergonomics and comprehensibilty of the system, rather than bifurcating into two separate lists of ownership, which may or may not match, are used for different things, one of which is built on exposing email addresses and one of which is trying to hide them, etc.

Reviewer 5: > gem owner/gem push rights are still complete keys to the kingdom

Yes.

Author: >>Adding to the above, there's a security advantage in not tying signatures to the owner emails

>I don't believe so. If you have gem push rights, you can push a gemspec with any email addresses you want in it, of course. And therefore, I believe, easily add a new email address to be used for this proposed signing mechanism to the gemspec too. gem owner/gem push rights are still complete keys to the kingdom. (Am I missing something?)

Security mechanisms offer a mix of prevention, detection, and recovery from compromises. Gem signing would not _prevent_ a compromised owner account from being used to push a gem. But it means that the attacker is easier to _detect_, because unless they also control the email address previously used, they need to introduce a new email address. This increases the chances of detecting an anomaly. Recovery is made easier because of the trusted public log. It’s not as good as prevention (for which we are championing MFA), but it’s an improvement nevertheless.

>I think better integration between gem owner and the signature source of identity might actually be important for gem maintainer ergonomics and increasing ease of use and uptake here.

As you said, we should not create more ways for gem maintainers to screw up w.r.t. email addresses. Do you have any proposals for improving ergonomics, and to reduce the room for error?

Reviewer 7: If gem authors are given extra work to authenticate their identity, then there would be the expectation that the authentication is used for authorization to make sure only gem owners are allowed to publish a package.

In this case, that means authorizing that the gem is signed by a gem owner, which means that the initial gem owner and changes to gem owners need to be signed and included in the transparency log such that they can be verified.

Currently, rubygems.org is the source of truth for the owners of a gem, so it needs to sign that initial gem owner list.  Further changes should be signed by one of the gem owners.  That way, the gem verification can check that a gem package is signed by one of the gem owners.

If the same were attempted to be done with fields on the gemspec, then we would need to verify against the list of owners in a previously verified version of the gem, not the gem being verified.  It would also mean that a gem would need to be published to change the list of owners.  In contrast, keeping gem ownership changes as separate events, that just need extra authentication, helps keep things working as ruby developers currently expect.

Reviewer 3: > If gem authors are given extra work to authenticate their identity, then there would be the expectation that the authentication is used for authorization to make sure only gem owners are allowed to publish a package.

We see signing ("I attest this build") and pushing as separate operations. In the original design signing is entirely independent of rubygems.org; in the alternative it gets tied in to rubygems.org identities. But it's still a logically distinct operation.

> Currently, rubygems.org is the source of truth for the owners of a gem, so it needs to sign that initial gem owner list. Further changes should be signed by one of the gem owners. That way, the gem verification can check that a gem package is signed by one of the gem owners.

The idea of having existing owners sign new owners is an interesting one. I think we can reuse that when we revisit the topic of further log entry types in future.

Reviewer 7: Signing and pushing are distinct actions, but the ability to do both should still be needed to publish a gem that will be accepted by a rubygems client for installation, such that they aren't really logically distinct.  If you mean that the rubygems.org shouldn't need reject the publishing of a gem without a valid signature, then that's correct that it shouldn't be needed for security reasons (it would just keep invalid data out of its database).

In the alternative where rubygems.org verifies the identity, then it should be possible to make the gem signing seamless from the perspective of the gem author, since they would otherwise have their identity verified twice in a row (for signing then pushing).  Since there is no security benefit from authenticating twice when these are done together, there should not be any extra work.  The seemless experience also means that there wouldn't be a need to opt-in to adopt this feature.  The only difference would be that the rubygems authentication for publishing would get persisted as a signature in the gem and events in the transparency log for verification.

Reviewer 3: I agree that signing and pushing are distinct and that in the long run both should be verified (we touched on it in "Other kinds of log entries"). But we considered it out of scope for this RFC. We're trying to boil the tea kettle first.

Multiple gems can be signed in a single command. For example, to sign `foo` and `bar`:

```console
$ gem signatures --sign foo bar
Sign your gem by selecting an identity provider in your browser. Press Ctrl-C to abort.
Gem `foo` signed as person@example.com
Gem `bar` signed as person@example.com
```

This functionality is intended for maintainers of multiple related gems, so they do not need to go through the browser-to-CLI flow multiple times.

Otherwise, using `gem signatures --sign` has the same signing behavior as `gem build`, including the browser authentication flow.

### Verifying a gem at install time

Gem signatures are automatically verified during installation. For example, to install and verify `foo`:

```console
$ gem install foo
Fetching foo-1.0.0.gem
Verified signature(s) for foo-1.0.0.gem
Successfully installed foo-1.0.0
[… documentation output …]
1 gem installed
```

> You may also use `gem install --verify-signatures` as in previous versions of RubyGems, but this is no longer necessary to trigger the verification process.

Reviewer 8: Does `--verify-signatures` refer to the old `-P` flag? If so, would it use the `HighSecurity` policy, or remove that option in favor of a single policy for everything?

Author: Our proposal doesn't leverage anything from the existing gem signing mechanism. `-P` and its possible values will eventually be discontinued, in our model.

In Phase 1, where the new system is opt-in, `--verify-signatures` is closest to `MediumSecurity`:  not all gems are required to be signed, but the ones having a signature will be verified.

A gem is deemed to be signed if we can find at least one signature in Rekor using the digest of the downloaded file.  Furthermore, at least one of those signatures needs to be associated to an email address listed in the file's gemspec.

Anyone can push a signature into Rekor for a given file.  We only care about the people that also appear in the gem's own spec.

By Phase 2, we'd like to host a copy of the Rekor signature right in rubygems.org itself, alongside the gem. Less of a reliance on sigstore at installation time!

   
   ```
   POST https://rekor.sigstore.dev/api/v1/index/retrieve
   {
     hash: "sha256:b65e5c01770ae7d46293540cc20dd3efd4de8057b2af9cde7e1038c67fd0825a"
   }
   ```
   
   The response is an array of entry UUIDs for the log entries matching the digest. (Note: Rekor uses its own format for UUIDs, not IETF RFC4122 UUIDs.)
   
   ```json
   ["e66b75a340d2cf240f92cc0fd7f77c3ea0855c7eb5e3e9e2ae873567d9491fdc"]
   ```

1. Retrieve the log entries by their UUIDs.

   ```
   POST https://rekor.sigstore.dev/api/v1/log/entries/retrieve
   {
     entryUUIDs: ["e66b75a340d2cf240f92cc0fd7f77c3ea0855c7eb5e3e9e2ae873567d9491fdc"]
   }
   ```

   The response is an array of log entries (abbreviated), keyed by the log entry UUIDs we submitted:
   
   ```jsonc
   [
    {
      "e66b75a340d2cf240f92cc0fd7f77c3ea0855c7eb5e3e9e2ae873567d9491fdc": {
        "attestation": {},
        "body": "eyJhcGlWZXJza[...]FMwdExRbz0ifX19fQ==",
        "integratedTime": 1642790103,
        "logID": "c0d23d6ad406973f9559f3bc5b8445c224f98b9591801d",
        "logIndex": 1124311,
        "verification": {
          "inclusionProof": {
               //…
        	},

>           "signedEntryTimestamp": "MEUCIQDWwF3ehGj+9BBsVdnm5Bg[...]eooKBPZkXLLDVl9t72FkY/VUHw="

Reviewer 9: Do you also plan to verify the Rekor entry? Note that you'll need to distribute the verification keys securely too. See comment below about TUF.

Author: Yes, I think the log entry should be verified, whether it's retrieved from Rekor itself or whether it's cached on rubygems.org. I don't yet know how the gem client would acquire/manage the key needed to check the signedEntryTimestamp.

As you throroughly explained in your TUF comment below, this is not trivial.

Reviewer 9: I wouldn't suggest pulling it directly from Rekor on each verification, since you'll be trusting the log to not lie or be compromised. You could cache the key at a trusted source like rubygems.org. You'll need to figure out an update mechanism too, which minimally could be supporting multiple verification keys.

I think it's also important to verify the Fulcio certificates without fetching the root from CA issuers. The AIA information for CA issuers is meant for chain building. Also, since Rekor and Fulcio are separate systems, I wouldn't necessarily trust that the certificate put into Rekor chains up to a trusted root.

         "format": "x509",
         "publicKey": {
           "content": "LS0tLS1CRUdJTiBDRVJUSFU[...]tLS0tLZJQ0FURS0tLS0tCg=="
         }
       }
     }
   }
   ```

   Then for each log entry:

1. Note that the `spec.signature.publicKey.content` field is in fact the X.509 public signing certificate, encoded in base64.

   The signer's email address is recorded as a subject alternative name in the signing certificate. If the email address does not appear in the gemspec's `email` field, i.e. its list of maintainers, then reject the log entry from further consideration. It is possible for a sufficiently capable person to manually submit a signature of their own without using the gem client, as the transparency log does not control who submits an entry for a given gem.  

   The issuing certificate is not included in the log entry. Retrieve it from the location referenced in the signing certificate's authority information access (AIA) extension:

   ```
   Authority Info Access: CA Issuers - URI:http://privateca-content-603fe7e7-0000-2227-bf75-f4f5e80d2954.storage.googleapis.com/   ca36a1e96242b9fcb146/ca.crt
   ```

>    An issuing certificate does not change after creation.  It may therefore be cached on the gem client. Fulcio's root certificate will infrequently change.

Reviewer 9: How will you trust the Fulcio root certificate and Rekor entry? It's important to either pin or securely distribute the verification keys and certificates, or verify that they chain up to Sigstore's TUF root. If you want to verify a Fulcio signed certificate, the Rekor entry, and the SCT from Fulcio, you'll need a mechanism to securely ship the Fulcio cert, Rekor public key, and Fulcio CT log public key respectively.

One option is TOFU (trust on first use) - The client should persist the above three verification keys/cert on first verification. However, they will be rotated over time. You will then need to inform users that the values have changed. You'll end up creating something like SSH, where users see a warning that keys have changed, and users end up becoming complacent and simply clicking through without verifying the changed value. 

A preferred option is to verify these keys/cert using Sigstore's TUF root. You mentioned TUF as an alternative to signing below, but for Sigstore, TUF is complementary to signing artifacts, as it's used to verify the verification keys. Cosign ships a trusted TUF root. Changes to the TUF root and its signed targets can be verified and trusted, since all changes will always chain up to the bundled TUF root.

Another alternative is bundling the verification keys/cert with the client, but once again, you'll need to figure out a secure update mechanism.

With your design, you must trust that the Rekor log is not compromised, since you use that to fetch the signed certificate. By verifying the Rekor log and verifying the its public key, you mitigate the attack where the Rekor log is compromised.

Author: In case it's not clear, we're talking about getting trustworthy keys to verify the signedEntryTimestamp on each rekor log entry, and also the Fulcio certificate signatures.

After brushing up on my understanding of [TUF](https://theupdateframework.io/), I have a better grasp of your questions and proposals.

IMO, trust on first use _might_ work for `gem` clients in a manual setting (e.g. one's own stable development machine), but it's not so trustworthy if the `gem` client is continuously reinstalled as part of some headless/CICD environment.  Every reinstall starts with a leap of faith that the online keys are currently trustworthy.  This could be exploited.

I'm leaning towards shipping with a trusted root, and following the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow) to acquire/verify the latest lineup of metadata files (newest root, timestamp, snapshot and target files) from sigstore. We then download the keys from sigstore as well. Implementing thre client flow is not trivial, but there are precedents to follow.  Perhaps this would make most sense as a self-contained `tuf-client` gem?

As a `gem` client release gets older, it will need to perform more interations of the [update root role](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#update-root) bit in order to reach a fresh state.  Newer major/minor/patch releases of rubygems ship with a fresher trusted root.

I'm not too clear on whether https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing is meant to be the TUF metadata & key repository, or simply a tool to generate them? I see a lineup of keys [here](https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing/tree/main/ceremony/2021-11-11/repository/targets), but the accompanying snapshot & timestamp metadata files have expired.

Reviewer 10: > I'm not too clear on whether https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing is meant to be the TUF metadata & key repository, or simply a tool to generate them? I see a lineup of keys here, but the accompanying snapshot & timestamp metadata files have expired.

Indeed, this provides a root for the whole log using a TUF root. It would be possible to e.g., provide a delegation to rubygems and use that TUF delegation as a "root" for rubygems packages that is based off the sigstore root. It would be understandable if that technically outsources the root to a third-party project.

I guess what I'm trying to say is that that repository also holds the tools to help you create your own root in the same way that sigstore does, so I think it's up to the community to decide if the root should be detached from sigstore, or a delegation from it :+1:

Reviewer 11: @rochlefebvre this sounds similar to the TUF + sigstore proposal in [this blog post](https://blog.sigstore.dev/sigstore-bring-your-own-stuf-with-tuf-40febfd2badd). That would let you use a gem-specific TUF root with sigstore.

Reviewer 9: If you don't have other trusted metadata you need to verify and update, then I'd lean towards bundling the Sigstore TUF root. Using the client workflow, the Rubygems' client would always fetch the latest TUF metadata. +1 to what @SantiagoTorres mentioned, if you have additional metadata you want to sign in the future, you can choose between a [delegated role](https://theupdateframework.io/metadata/#delegated-targets-metadata-role1json) chained up to the Sigstore root, or maintain a second Rubygems TUF root. 

> As a gem client release gets older, it will need to perform more interations of the update root role bit in order to reach a fresh state. Newer major/minor/patch releases of rubygems ship with a fresher trusted root.

Something to note: Roots can be cached locally, so the update mechanism doesn't make many remote calls.

Reviewer 12: Yes, eventually I think there can be an addendum to this RFC where RubyGems can delegate trusted signing keys to projects/developers ala [PEP 480](https://github.com/axelsimon/peps/pull/1).

Author: I have part of an answer for my previous questions, thanks to the info in https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/issues/1273#issuecomment-1022731474

sigstore's TUF targets are not yet versioned (as of v2).  Starting in v3, and thereafter, the latest targets metadata will list all supported certificate and key files: current, expired, rotated, but not revoked.

For example, a TUF client can [follow the update workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow) to download current and expired Fulcio root certificates. All of these certs may be trusted, as long as they were valid at the time the gem was signed.  A signing certificate identifies its parent certificate via the Authority Key Identifier claim.

Past and present Rekor public keys may also be downloaded using the targets metadata. It's not clear to me which key file we should use to validate the log entry signature.  Trying all of them is _one_ way to do it... 🤷

Reviewer 9: Sorry I didn't respond to the first comment! 

Before https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/issues/1273#issuecomment-1022731474, there was no way to verify entries with older keys. The expectation would be that you could only verify entries signed with the latest set of keys/certs from TUF. With this new design, we'll store all the current and previous versions of the key in TUF metadata. 

To answer your question about how to verify a Rekor signature with multiple keys, yep, right now we're just trying all of them - [code](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/f1a56a66eacb6b64b8902673934d8ddef082893e/pkg/cosign/tlog.go#L290-L300)

For verifying the code signing certificate, the approach is more elegant - [code](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/18d2ce0b458018951f7356db911467a427a8dffe/pkg/cosign/verify.go#L719-L733). We use a `CertPool` to load in all trusted certificates. `Verify` will find all valid chains starting from the leaf certificate, through intermediates, down to the root, using Authority Key Identifier to find the correct chain. Hopefully there's an equivalent Ruby library like https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509.

For verifying the Fulcio CT log key, we do the same verification logic as with the Rekor key, trying to verify against all trusted keys - [code](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/18d2ce0b458018951f7356db911467a427a8dffe/cmd/cosign/cli/fulcio/fulcioverifier/fulcioverifier.go#L98-L108)

As for your earlier comment about AIA, I'd recommend avoiding using AIA to pull down a certificate. AIA isn't meant to find a root of trust, it's meant to be used by clients for chain building. If you use the TUF metadata, this should contain the Fulcio root CA certificates. When you implement storing the signature alongside the gem, i'd recommend also including the certificate chain (from leaf to root, in case we add subordinate CAs at some point).

Reviewer 13: One other thing to note: the `LogID` field within the Rekor signed entry timestamp (used for offline verification) is the SHA256 hash of DER-encoded public key, which marginally helps in finding the right one.

Reviewer 12: > Before https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/issues/1273#issuecomment-1022731474, there was no way to verify entries with older keys. The expectation would be that you could only verify entries signed with the latest set of keys/certs from TUF. With this new design, we'll store all the current and previous versions of the key in TUF metadata.

@asraa and I talked about this last week: it is definitely possible with TUF, it just depends on what targets (i.e., keys/certs) you sign. I don't remember the entire context now, but perhaps Asra or Hayden can add more context.

### Other kinds of log entries

Build signatures are a form of attestation that assert authorship or co-authorship of a gem. But there is no need to limit RubyGems attestations to signatures alone. We foresee that all security-critical events could be stored in sigstore to ensure an immutable log independent of RubyGems infrastructure. These could be rubygems.org events such as Push and Yank. Daily TUF repository signatures could provide timestamps of snapshots of the bucket. Gems could be endorsed by individuals who would attest what kind of inspection they had performed. Some work on the latter has been [contemplated by the in-toto community](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/77).

Ideally, these other log entry types would be developed in partnership with other ecosystems, to ensure monitoring consistency for application and infrastructure security teams.

### Alternative flows

> The design outline above requires interaction with a browser. In some scenarios this will be undesirable or unworkable. We believe that alternative flows are technically feasible, but we have not prototyped such flows. Ideally such a design would be settled by the start of Phase 2. As this work develops, we expect to open a follow up RFC.

Reviewer 5: We should roll non-interactive in initial "production grade release" of this feature. There are "top" gems released automatically (like Amazon Web Services one) and this should not prevent signing them IMHO.

Reviewer 5: I think this is answered by https://github.com/rubygems/rfcs/pull/37#issuecomment-1024520219.

Author: > > As part of our work, we have developed a proof of concept system that works as a gem plugin.
> 
> 🤔 Looking at the current (reference) implementation, I see a huge list of big dependencies (like `activesupport`). If we plan to make this part of RubyGems by default, we will need to find way how to incorporate this feature with minimal dependencies, since RubyGems itself (by design) can't have any dependencies on gems.
> 
> ...
>  _I'm using `activesupport` as an example only here. Same can be applied to any dependency._
> 
> 🤔 On the other side (as also mentioned in RFC) OAuth2 is super complex and implementing it again just for this purpose doesn't make any sense.

We leveraged many dependencies to quickly develop our proof of concept, but we know that this is incompatible with how rubygems is designed.  We're prepared to do the detailed work to put it on a serious gem diet. We didn't want to surprise the community with production code before building consensus through the RFC process.

There are many gems, like activesupport or faraday, which are definitely optional.  Then there's libraries that facilitate OAuth, OpenID Connect, JSON Web Token, JSON Web keys, and even browser interactions.  To a certain extent, any one of those libraries could be vendored or reimplemented, on a case-by-case basis.

OAuth and OpenID are huge specs, with many supported flows, and so are the gems which support them.  In our reference-level explanation, we can see that the authentication bit isn't so bad. RubyGems doesn't need to go full OAuth2/OpenID Connect compliant to interact with sigstore.  TBH, I have not delved into JWT and JWK yet, so I don't know how heavy of a lift reimplementation would be.

Opening a browser or tab on many supported platforms is non-trivial.  The [Launchy](https://github.com/copiousfreetime/launchy) gem we use takes care of many details. I'd consider vendoring it to solve an otherwise hairy problem.  It only depends on the `addressable` gem at runtime, so there's that!

> My initial idea is to keep this as a gem plugin, support `--sign` parameter by default (without having gem installed) and install this gem if this parameter is used and the gem plugin is missing (similar what we do currently for missing bundler version). That way it can still use the dependencies and make it usable in default RubyGems installation. As a side-benefit we can ensure latest supported version is installed.

This is a very clever way of installing a plugin on demand. It could work in the early parts of Phase 1, while signing is still opt-in.  However, we'd like gem signing to eventually become _opt-out_.  That would make the plugin required for gem maintainers.  Having a support matrix of **m** RubyGems versions times **n** plugin versions is undesireable, especially if it's security sensitive.

Reviewer 5: > However, we'd like gem signing to eventually become opt-out. That would make the plugin required for gem maintainers. Having a support matrix of m RubyGems versions times n plugin versions is undesireable, especially if it's security sensitive.

I don't see any problem having this approach used also with `opt-out` signing. It will just install the dependency when it will be missing the same way as it will do it during `opt-in` phase. We can hardcode the gem version used on RubyGems release (for example following RubyGems versioning). Gem would be required, yes, but it will be auto-installed when missing on first usage. See example (verbose) output.

```bash
# first run
$ gem build my.gemspec --sign
sigstore rubygems plugin not installed, installing now

# following run
gem build my.gemspec --sign
```

Later in phase 2:

```bash
# first run
$ gem build my.gemspec
sigstore rubygems plugin not installed, installing now

# following run
gem build my.gemspec
```

Author: I'm really warming up to this idea.  The proposed gem signature verification flow still could be implemented in the `gem` client directly, since it's fairly straightforward.

Gem signing is where things get complicated, functionality-wise.   If we can leverage dependencies to do it, then great! Install on first use makes sense, as the vast majority of RubyGems users don't build gems.

I feel this would be a first party plugin, and would have its own repo under the rubygems GH organization.  Is this your expectation as well?

Reviewer 5: > I feel this would be a first party plugin, and would have its own repo under the rubygems GH organization. Is this your expectation as well?

Yes!

While we can probably ignore these considerations for Phase 1, by Phase 3 they will need to be resolved.

### New dependencies vs hand-rolling

OIDC and OAuth2 are non-trivial standards to implement, because each supports a variety of usecases and flows. In the development of our proof of concept, we have relied on gems which provide OIDC and OAuth2 capabilities, even though we use a fraction of those capabilities. We also leverage gems to work with JSON web tokens and JSON web keys. As a consequence, the proof of concept requires several dozen direct and transitive dependencies for a RubyGems client plugin.

If transplanted into the main client, this would be a substantial step increase over the current number of dependencies. However, the client, as a design principle, eschews dependencies as much as possible. This leaves us with a difficult balancing act. On the one hand, we want to maintain the principle of minimal dependencies. On the other hand, hand-rolling narrowly-targeted security code will be slow, complex and can introduce a heightened risk of security bugs.

### Other kinds of log entries

> Build signatures are a form of attestation that assert authorship or co-authorship of a gem. But there is no need to limit RubyGems attestations to signatures alone. We foresee that all security-critical events could be stored in sigstore to ensure an immutable log independent of RubyGems infrastructure. These could be rubygems.org events such as Push and Yank. Daily TUF repository signatures could provide timestamps of snapshots of the bucket. Gems could be endorsed by individuals who would attest what kind of inspection they had performed. Some work on the latter has been [contemplated by the in-toto community](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/77).

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Build signatures are a form of attestation that assert authorship or co-authorship of a gem. But there is no need to limit RubyGems attestations to signatures alone. We foresee that all security-critical events could be stored in sigstore to ensure an immutable log independent of RubyGems infrastructure. These could be rubygems.org events such as Push and Yank. Daily TUF repository signatures could provide [snapshots](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJ6b2eoq0NY&list=PLj6h78yzYM2NOCoaYcYbiAf4KPIF36T8t&index=12) of all gems. Gems could be endorsed by individuals who would attest what kind of inspection they had performed. Some work on the latter has been [contemplated by the in-toto community](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/issues/77).
```

In an ideal world, gem maintainers would find gem signing safe and trivial, so that they are inclined to sign their gems. Gem users would be able to rely on nearly all gems being signed, giving them increased confidence that they are using gems that have neither been falsified nor tampered with. In order to achieve the ideal world, we need an easier method of signing gems and verifying signatures that are valid forever.

## Guide-level explanation

This RFC introduces changes in technology and policy. To ease adoption, this RFC proposes three main rollout phases:

1. **Opt-in build-time signing of gems.** This allows us to test, polish and harden signing and verifying without disrupting all existing workflows. During this phase maintainers will need to deliberately choose to sign their gems, and they can be nudged with a message to do so at build time. Similarly, users will need to deliberately verify gem signatures, and we can also nudge them to do so. The `gem cert` command will be deprecated.

> 1. **Opt-out build-time signing of gems.** At this phase we will have gained experience and confidence with the new system. The RubyGems client will switch policy to make gem signing the default behavior, meaning that deliberate effort is needed to _not_ sign a gem. We expect this would create a rising tide of signed gems on rubygems.org as gem maintainers release new versions. Verification would happen automatically, but the lack of a signature would not be fatal. Gem authors would be able to set a policy that all their gem releases must be signed ([analogous to MFA configuration](https://guides.rubygems.org/mfa-requirement-opt-in/)). We would introduce a policy that the top most-downloaded gems must be signed ([analogous to the proposal for MFA](https://github.com/rubygems/rfcs/pull/36)). The `gem cert` command would be removed.

Reviewer 11: I'm a bit confused about the policy that the gem authors can set. If the author is opting out of signing, is there any secure way to communicate this policy to users? It seems that an attacker would be motivated to make a fake policy opting a package out of signing. Maybe this could instead be left to users similar to in part 3?

```console
$ gem signatures --sign foo
Sign your gem by selecting an identity provider in your browser. Press Ctrl-C to abort.
Gem `foo` signed as person@example.com
```

Before signing a gem, ensure that the email address you use to sign into your identity provider also appears in your gemspec's `email` field. The gem client will return an error otherwise.  Upon installing the gem later on, only signatures associated with emails listed in the gemspec will be considered valid.

Multiple gems can be signed in a single command. For example, to sign `foo` and `bar`:

```console
$ gem signatures --sign foo bar
Sign your gem by selecting an identity provider in your browser. Press Ctrl-C to abort.
Gem `foo` signed as person@example.com
Gem `bar` signed as person@example.com
```

This functionality is intended for maintainers of multiple related gems, so they do not need to go through the browser-to-CLI flow multiple times.

Otherwise, using `gem signatures --sign` has the same signing behavior as `gem build`, including the browser authentication flow.

### Verifying a gem at install time

> Gem signatures are automatically verified during installation. For example, to install and verify `foo`:

Reviewer 11: As an additional feature here, it might be nice to let the user specify a specific email that should have generated the signature. This could do a couple of things. It would let a user ensure that a specific trusted developer uploaded or performed verification on a package, solving the issue discussed above about a compromised account changing the gemspec (granted with a fair amount of manual work on the part of the end user).

In the long term, this could also allow for additional tooling to implement TUF-style namespaced delegations to email addresses chaining from a trusted root.

Verified signature(s) for foo-1.0.0.gem
```

Verifying using `gem signatures --verify`, including verifying multiple gem signatures and the treatment of unsigned gems, is otherwise the same as `gem install`.

## Reference-level explanation

Our discussion at the reference level is assumed to be at Phase 1. This is for two reasons. Firstly, Phase 1 most closely resembles the [proof of concept RubyGems plugin](https://github.com/Shopify/ruby-sigstore) that we have developed from an early sigstore prototype. Secondly, we don’t expect radical changes in implementation for phases 2 and 3, except to improve performance by caching signatures. The explanations below will still be largely accurate throughout the rollout.

To achieve the “one click” gem signing experience, the RubyGems client orchestrates a multi-step flow with several services. The design of this flow means that signing keys are ephemeral and that signatures are published to a trusted public transparency log. First we will give background about ephemeral keys and transparency logs, then we will describe the gem signing and gem signature verification flows.

### Background concepts

#### Ephemeral signing keys

> Historically, digital signature schemes have been based on dual-key encryption. The signer possesses a _private signing key_, which is not shared with anyone else. This key is used to sign artifacts, creating _signatures_. The signer then publishes a _public certificate_, which includes a _public verification key_. The public certificate binds information about the signer’s identity together with the public verification key into a single unit. The public certificate can be distributed widely. Verifiers can use the public certificate to verify that the private signing key was used to create a signature for a given artifact. In gem signing today, most certificates are self-signed, meaning that there is no independent root of trust for the claims of identity made in 

Author: A colleague made this suggestion:
> I never heard "dual-key encryption" before - the description that comes after matches what's commonly known as "public-key cryptography" so I wanted to suggest to use that industry standard term

Makes sense to me!

Reviewer 3: I could've sworn I'd seen it before, but "dual-key" seems to be a _very_ niche term for what it is. I think "public-key cryptography" would be better in this case.

   [rest of issuing (root) certificate]
   -----END CERTIFICATE-----
   ```

1. Compute a SHA256 digest of the entire .gem file's contents, then sign the digest using the private signing key.

1. Submit the signature and public signing certificate to Rekor before the signing certificate expires (example uses pseudocode):

   ```
   POST https://rekor.sigstore.dev/api/v1/log/entries
   {
    kind: "rekord",
    apiVersion: "0.0.1",
    spec: {
      signature: {
        format: "x509",
        content: Base64.encode64(signature),
        publicKey: {
          content: Base64.encode64(cert_chain_pem),
        },
      },
      data: {
        content: Base64.encode64(gem_contents),
        hash: {
          algorithm: "sha256",
          value: gem_digest,
        },
      },
    },
   }
   ```

The gem signature and certificate chain are stored together in an immutable Rekor log entry, such as https://rekor.sigstore.dev/api/v1/log/entries/e66b75a340d2cf240f92cc0fd7f77c3ea0855c7eb5e3e9e2ae873567d9491fdc. In the signature verification flow, we will be able to locate this entry by searching Rekor using the .gem file's digest.

### The verifying flow

> The signature verification flow occurs at gem installation time. In our proposed Phase 1, verification is opt-in, and the signature entry is only hosted on Rekor itself. By Phase 2, we anticipate that rubygems.org will keep a copy of the signature as well, and that clients will download it alongside the gem itself, decoupling the install experience from any Rekor queries on the happy path.

Reviewer 14: I'd be interested in more details here about what exactly would be kept alongside the gem, and in what format. Is this just the `.Body.RekordObj.signature` field from the transparency log, as JSON? Something else?

Author: Good question! I envision we'd keep the entire log entry response body from Rekor, as a JSON file. So it's the response from `POST /log/entries/retrieve`, in verification step 2.

Most of the interesting signature bits live in the body, i.e. the _rekord_.  The log entry itself contains the `integratedTime` field, which is the point in time where the certificate chain must be valid. A client would need to know this before it accepts the cert chain.

It also contains verification material for the entry. We're most interested in the signedEntryTimestamp,  a signed digest of the entry's body, integratedTime, and logIndex(?).  Anyone with Rekor's verification key can verify the authenticity of the log entry without needing to phone home.

TODO: insert dad joke about _s.E.T. no phone home_

I have no opinions on the name of this sig file.  A gem could be signed multiple times, so it's not as straightforward as `gemname.version.sig`.

Reviewer 14: Agreed, I am similarly interested in avoiding 'phoning home' to rekor. And I agree that whatever happens here should be able to support multiple signatures, but also be able to be tied to the original artifact.

Maybe for an artifact like `gemname-1.0.0.gem`, something like `<artifact filename>.<some unique value>.sig`, where `<some unique value>` is one of:

* the Rekor `LogIndex`?
  * e.g. `gemname-1.0.0.gem.1218056.sig`
* the Rekor `UUID`/`LogID`? (probably too long)
  * e.g. `gemname-1.0.0.gem.06a53257a4cb3e4d0589b117de8b14712927ad5a73da5279f00d4d88a5adfb2d.sig`
  * e.g. `gemname-1.0.0.gem.c0d23d6ad406973f9559f3ba2d1ca01f84147d8ffc5b8445c224f98b9591801d.sig`
* the Rekor `sha256` hash? (also probably too long, but...)
  * e.g. `gemname-1.0.0.gem.98ea6e4f216f2fb4b69fff9b3a44842c38686ca685f3f55dc48c5d3fb1107be4.sig`
* the first N characters of the Rekor `sha256` hash, similar to git short hashes?
  * e.g. `gemname-1.0.0.gem.98ea6e4.sig`
  
I think I like the last one the best.

Reviewer 12: Maybe multiple signatures is one of those things that should be punted to future versions of the RFC which may include TUF, which is designed for problems such as these?

Reviewer 9: > the first N characters of the Rekor sha256 hash, similar to git short hashes?
> e.g. gemname-1.0.0.gem.98ea6e4.sig

I also like this approach. Since the rekor hash is the hash of the signed bytes/gem, it's trivial to derive the expected name of the signature from just the gem. This won't work for multiple signatures, so possibly a monotonically increasing version, `gemname-1.0.0.gem.<hash>.<version>.sig`?

I also wanted to call out that for verifying a persisted bundle instead of hitting the log, we'll need to make sure we verify that the offline Rekor bundle is actually linked to the gem. For example, [Cosign](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/2f5e1ffa0fe0c1104355e18a1bc77d91ac301a85/pkg/cosign/verify.go#L623-L629) does this on verification by calculating the hash of the payload and comparing it to the hash in the entry. This is necessary to make sure an arbitrary Rekor entry isn't bundled with the Gem.

While today sigstore is at an early stage of production readiness, we have confidence that in the long term sigstore’s infrastructure will be well funded and operated. It has funding support from the [OpenSSF](https://openssf.org/), a foundation which has [already collected 10 million dollars of funding from industry partners](https://openssf.org/press-release/2021/10/13/open-source-security-foundation-raises-10-million-in-new-commitments-to-secure-software-supply-chains/). We expect this funding to remain steady for the foreseeable future.

We are less concerned about unavailability risks at verification time. This is because we believe it will be possible to cache Rekor log entries into the RubyGems bucket. Essentially, a file containing the signature and signing certificate for a .gem would live side-by-side with the .gem. Clients could retrieve the signature and certificate from the RubyGems bucket, without needing to connect to sigstore (though retaining the option to do so if sufficiently paranoid). Since installation operations greatly outnumber builds, the impact of any sigstore service problems would be contained to gem authors.

> ## Rationale and Alternatives

Reviewer 15: Was any thought given to the relatively new `ssh-keygen` signing functionality? [Git](https://calebhearth.com/sign-git-with-ssh) recently added support for signing git commits with SSH keys. We could do something similar with a new "gem" namespace for signing.

I see a few advantages to this approach over sigstore:

- Many developers will already have an SSH key used for various purposes, including access to GitHub via `git push`/`git pull`, access to remote servers, etc.
- It removes the need for a fourth party beyond the gem maintainer, the gem consumer, and RubyGems to be involved in the signing and verification process

A difficulty with ssh-keygen's signing is that it requires each gem installer to maintain an allowed_signers file with each maintainer's email, but that could be partially alleviated by RubyGems running a certificate authority signing keys as they're used to sign gems. We could explore automatically adding that CA to ~/.ssh/allowed_signers, coaching users to add it, etc.

There's also an issue of maintaining the SSH keys (at least the public), which tend to be considered disposable. I do think there would be more coaching needed to have maintainers preserve their SSH keys, but as only the public key is required for verifying we might get away with just RubyGems tracking those.

Reviewer 16: Hey!

Sigstore maintainer here. I don't really ssh keys as orthogonal to the sigstore based ones. We can definitely add support for them in cosign, and they're already supported in rekor actually. The main issue is really the part you outlined:

> There's also an issue of maintaining the SSH keys (at least the public), which tend to be considered disposable

Rekor/Fulcio basically just automate the dispensing of disposable keys to help with this problem. We could do ssh ones or anything. We can also support people that do like to manage their own keys with the same systems.

Reviewer 6: What if rubygems.org simply let gem owners register public keys authorized for signing? Ala github. (And let you revoke them etc, so I guess it woudl keep a record of keys that were authorized for signing during certain dates, for verifying historical gems).  That is much easier infrastructure to build than an "OIDC/OAuth IDP", I think?

Reviewer 15: That was kind of my thought, and the CA allows them to make allowed signers maintenance easier.

Reviewer 9: > What if rubygems.org simply let gem owners register public keys authorized for signing? 

SSH signing keys are frequently lost. If users lose track of the keys, they'll need to revoke them. We then can't trust the artifacts that were signed with that SSH key. Ephemeral keys where you trust an entity that signs the keys are going to be resistant to this.

There's very little support for SSH CAs out there. I know that Smallstep offers an [SSH CA](https://smallstep.com/docs/ssh). In my opinion, maintenance of a CA is going to be the same as maintenance of an OIDC IDP, with respect to key/cert rotation and the necessary security posture.

I also worry this would impact automation. For example, Github only issues OIDC tokens. There isn't wide library/platform support for SSH signing, we'd be relying on a very new feature.

Reviewer 17: SSH CAs do not have a CRL function as regular X509 Certificates, making revocation a more manual process of having to add the revoked keys to a file on each client. This makes using SSH Keys as a code signing entity harder to implement (to mitigate the lack of revocation at [Keytos](https://www.keytos.io/) we create short term SSH certificates but that would not work for code signing since the packages would have to be re-signed with a new key fairly frequently. If going the certificate route I would recommend doing X509 Certificates as these CAs do have the ability to easily revoke certificates.
